# Should I do an unpaid Internship?

Unpaid Internships - Are They Worth It?

I recently had a call with my friend and peer Montgomery Gole, during which we discussed and planned one of the research papers we are working on. Monty and I are both pursuing our MSc Thesis under the same supervisor and we were group mates for two courses we took during the Winter 2023 term. Over this period, we have worked on some great projects and assignments around data science and natural language processing. We have also had many opportunities to discuss our career aspirations and share life experiences.

During our last conversation on May 11, 2023, we discussed various topics ranging from personal finance awareness for new graduates, steps to buy a new home for first-time home buyers in Canada, challenges I faced while managing and leading client projects, and what I look for while interviewing candidates to hire for my team.

Monty shared with me about a potential internship opportunity he had come across and his concerns about joining an unpaid internship. He asked me whether I see value in doing an unpaid internship or not.

I have a strong bias towards this topic because I feel that whatever I am today, and whatever I have achieved in my career as well as my personal life in the last six years, is all because of an unpaid job/internship I did at Dataperformers back in 2016. It introduced me to the fascinating field of Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, which eventually became the primary source of my financial wellbeing. It helped me get accepted into a PhD program (which I eventually dropped out of), learn and lead a few of the most successful projects for our key clients at Dataperformers, and most importantly, meet Mehdi, Amine, and Ali who eventually became my closest friends and stayed with me during my ups and downs as a new immigrant to Canada.

Setting aside my personal bias, if I were to go out in the market now to get an unpaid internship, during the interview, I would request the founders or hiring manager to "walk me through their product or service and pinpoint processes where they see my contributions." I would try to focus on the technical clarity of this discussion. For example, if I am approaching for an ML or software development-based internship, the discussion should bring up technical terms like the exact model or algorithm we are looking for to try and test, the deployment infrastructure we would like to use, and the programming stack we will be using for backend and frontend, etc.

The clearer the path and plan they can provide for this discussion, the better idea I can get about the potential technologies I will be able to learn during this internship. It also gives me an understanding of how ready I am for this role. If I know that I can match the requirements to achieve the expected contributions, I can verify that I am almost ready for this role and will gain more exposure and opportunities to improve my networking and collaborative skills during this internship. If I feel there is a gap in my current technical skill set and the requirements to achieve the expected contributions, I will gain more exposure and opportunities to improve my technical skillset. Based on this, I can evaluate the impact a particular internship will create in my career and whether I need that exact impact now or not.

In conclusion, I believe that unpaid internships can be worth it if they offer valuable learning opportunities and can help us gain experience in our desired fields. However, it is essential to have a clear understanding of the role, the expectations, and the potential learning opportunities before accepting an unpaid internship.